# MAVEN:

- Apache Maven is a powerful build automation tool primarily used for Java projects. It manages the project's build lifecycle, handles dependencies, compiles code, and produces artifacts such as JARs, WARs, and other distributions.
  
- Maven uses a project object model (POM) file to describe the project configuration, including dependencies, plugins, build profiles, and more.

## What maven does:
             -  Compilation of Source Code									
             -  Running Tests (unit tests and functional tests)						
             -  Packaging the results into JAR’s, WAR’s, RPM’s etc.					
             -  Upload the packages to remote repo’s (Nexus, Artifactory)


## Maven Builds Lifecycle:

**Clean lifecycle:**

Clean: remove the file which is generated by the previous build.

**Default life cycle:**

- ```validate:``` validate the project structure. This step validates if the project structure is correct.                       
  For example - It checks if all the dependencies have been downloaded and are available in the local repository

- ```Compile:``` compile the source codes. Convert the .java file into .class file.
  
- ```Test:``` run test on compile code.
  
- ```Packages:``` packages the compile code in distributed format, like JAR and WAR.
  
- ```Verify:``` Runs checks to verify the package is valid and meets quality criteria.
  
- ```Install:``` store the build packages in local maven repository.
  
- ```Deploy:``` Copies the final package to a remote repository for sharing.

Each phase within a lifecycle is executed in sequence, and each phase consists of one or more goals. Goals are specific tasks that Maven performs during a phase. 
For example, the compile phase has a compiler:compile goal responsible for compiling source code.

•	Maven follows a sequential order to execute the commands where if you run step n, all steps preceding it (Step 1 to n-1) are also executed.

•	For example – if we run the Installation step (Step 7), it will validate, compile, package and verify the project along with running unit and integration tests (Step 1 to 6) before installing the built package to the local repository.


## Maven Commands:
•	```mvn clean```: Cleans the project and removes all files generated by the previous build, so that the target folder generated from the previous build is removed before running a newer build

•	```mvn compile```: Compiles source code of the project.

•	```mvn test-compile```: Compiles the test source code.

•	```mvn test```: Runs tests for the project

•	```mvn package```: Creates JAR or WAR file for the project to convert it into a distributable format.

•	```mvn install```: Deploys the packaged JAR/ WAR file to the local repository.

•	```mvn deploy```: Copies the packaged JAR/ WAR file to the remote repository after compiling, running tests and building the project.


- if we want to run the step-in debug mode for more detailed build information and logs, we will add ```-X``` to the actual command. Hence, the install step with debug mode on will have the following command:   ```mvn -X install```.

- Consider a scenario where we do not want to run the tests while packaging or installing the Java project. In this case, we use ```-DskipTests``` along with the actual command. If we need to run the install step by skipping the tests associated with the project, the command would be: ```mvn install -DskipTests```


